Chapter one entitled Childhood and Before. One of
the birthrights of someone born in 1932 is the
qualification as a depression baby.
On April 26, 1932,
Margie Margaret Pressman, my mother, had her
third boy.
Her father, Will Presnell, was a merchant,
farmer, and postmaster.
The home that we lived in was next door to a country
store that was more or less a company store for the
farmers that lived on the land of my grandfather as
sharecroppers.
At one time there were over 20 families that lived
on the farm, farming cotton and corn on relatively
small acreage since it was all done with horses and
mules and was prior to there being any tractor
power.
The sharecroppers farmed their crops on what they
called a third and fourth basis, or on the halves.
If you owned your own equipment and owned your own
mules, then you farmed the land as a sharecropper
and gave the landlord one third of the corn and one
fourth of the cotton. If the landlord had to
furnish these implements of the husbandry, then
the sharecropper received half of the corn and
half of the cotton. Most all of the land was farmed
and was either in cotton or corn, and very little of
it was in cattle.
Not a great deal is remembered about my childhood
days, but I do recall seeing my father very angry at
one time. In fact, probably the only time that I can
recall, with the exception of one other time
through the radio that we were listening
to. As I say, that was during the New Deal days when I
was a child and there were federal programs to try
to get the country back on its feet. There was
little money and what little there was was
furnished by federal programs and one of the
programs where my father was trying to help out the
sharecroppers. He advanced them some funds based
on the fact that they would get some federal funds.
And when the money came in, he took the money. The
federal bureaucrats considered this wrong and
threatened to take some action. And he was very
upset with sharecroppers that were
participating in such a activity since he was out
of the goodness of his heart was trying to help.
My father, Will Presnell, was a very patient man
and many people say that I am much like my father in
that I show a great deal of patience when times are
difficult.
A very trying period of time for my mother
particularly was when I was about two and a half
years old. I fell off the front porch and broke my
leg in the upper portion of the thigh portion and
was taken to the hospital and the leg was put in a
cast. The leg grew back But it was not straight. And
the doctor gave my mother and father the choice of
either letting it stay like that or breaking it
over, hoping that the break would be in the right
place and that the leg would be OK. My mother
primarily made the choice of re-breaking the leg
and hoping that it would break right and could be
reset.
It worked out fine, and I had never had any problems
with it. The problem with the leg was the fact that
the fracture was so high close to my hip that both
legs should have been suspended with a pulley as I
lay flat on my back. And the doctor only suspended
one leg. And as a result, when I twisted and turned,
that got the fracture grew back and was not in
properly positioned. So I have my mother
primarily to thank for the fact that I did not have
to grow up as a cripple. In addition to my
grandfather's extensive farming operations
through sharecroppers, My father had his own
tracts of land and some farming was done primarily
on the haves. And so my father spent much of the time
after things settled down and were not so busy in
the store,
out overseeing the farming operations. while I
stayed in the store and ran the store. It would have
been impossible in my early days to do that because
the store was very active. It had over seven
employees and sold everything that you could
imagine that was needed to run a household and to
run a farm. As I became a teenager, all the
sharecroppers virtually were gone, had moved to
town. and the land was converted primarily to
cattle operations. There was some farming, but it
was done with tractors. At the tender age of six,
when I entered public schools, there was a school
just up the road. At that time, it taught all 11
grades. The high school did not have a 12th grade as
it does today. It was a rural school called Tabor
High School.
It was a wonderful experience with some great
teachers. Although it was small and the teaching
staff was only about seven or eight teachers, they
were all very confident and did an excellent job of
giving the children the background that they
needed. I recall about the second grade, a cyclone
or tornado hit the school building and virtually
knocked it off of its props. It was up in the air on
stilts almost with brick columns. I remember that
we could walk under the school building, most of
it, and so it was not destroyed but made inoperable
by knocking it off its props, so to speak. That led
to building another school building and, in the
process, added an auditorium and gymnasium. And
for the first time, we were able to participate in
sports, primarily volleyball and basketball,
indoors. Up to that time, basketball was played on
the outside on gravel courts and could really skin
up your knees. I was a little young at that time and
was fortunate enough to do most of my basketball
playing after the new gymnasium was completed and
enjoyed participating in that sport, although I
was usually playing with much older boys and
bigger boys and got to participate very little in
this varsity sport. I got to ride the bench a lot,
but played very little.
When the tornado hit, it was very unexpected. We
did not have the warning facilities that are
available today. And it was very fortunate that no
one was hurt. After all, there were over 100
children in the school building, and there was one
long porch that fell to the ground. But as I say, no
one was hurt, and all except the small ones. And I
was in that category. Went to the ditches and laid
down in the ditches until it had passed.
It's one of those events that many adults today
still remember where they were when the tornado
hit the school. Within a few years, Tabor High
School began to move some of its grades to Bryan
High School. For example, the high school was run
away with first and integrated with Bryan,
leaving the other nine grades in the school at
Tabor.
The year I was in the sixth grade, The upper grades
from the fifth on were abolished, so I entered
Lamar Junior High School in Bryan on the seventh
grade level.
This was a good experience, although most of the
families and kids in my class were not happy with it
because they really wanted to stay in a small rural
school. Frankly, it was not a challenge. It was
probably too easy to pass. And it was time that we
needed the challenge of a school system such as
Bryan had to offer. Moving to the Bryan schools
also brought about a different mix of students as
opposed to the ones that attended the Tabor
school. The Tabor school was sprinkled pretty
heavily with first generation Italians that
lived in the area between Tabor and Bryan and were
still farming the land. I recall quite vividly
that many of these kids could not start the school
until about a month after began in September
because of the fact that they had to pick cotton
during the month of September and they would
finally be able to come to school for the first time
around the first of October. So things were kind of
held back waiting for these kids to get in school
and allow them an opportunity to catch up. But this
was just the times we lived in where kids were
necessary labor to pick the cotton that was grazed
on their farms. For a while, I lost track of some of
these kids that I went to school with, but began to
run into them again when I engaged in my first
political campaign in 1968. Most of them had
stayed in Bryan. Many of them were running
convenience stores and were small
entrepreneurs, and they were in a position to be a
great help, and they were certainly good friends
that I'll always remember. There were many
influences on my life. One was the 4-H Club that I
joined when I was just nine years of age, and I was
able to travel to Dallas and to Houston to those
livestock shows and show some of my livestock over
the years that I was raising. This was a good
experience and one that I'll always treasure. The
reason it was such a good experience was because of
the great leadership that Wallace Kimbrough, who
was the county agent for most of those years,
furnished the program. I'll always remember Mr.
Kimbrough and we hope that his memory will stay
alive for years to come through a scholarship
program that my brother and I and several others
started for him in his name at Texas A&M
University. The scholarship is awarded each year
at the annual awards program of the Brazos County
4-H club and provided to the student that
demonstrates
scholarship, leadership, and judging ability.
One of the programs that Mr. Kimbrough started
that had an impact on the lives of many of us was the
livestock judging programs. I recall I placed
first in a dairy judging contest at the Houston
Flat Stock Show and Livestock Show one year and won
a dairy heifer. That probably
increased my interest in the dairy industry as a
result of winning that heifer and having to go back
and show it at the Livestock Show the next year. As a
youngster, I was extremely shy, but I had a strong
compulsion to join the Methodist Church and
accept Jesus Christ as my personal Savior at an
early age. However, because of my shyness, I
resisted a number of times when the invitation was
offered. Finally, we had an elderly pastor by the
name of Reverend Day who took me fishing one
afternoon and it helped overcome some of my
timidity and so the next Sunday when the
invitation was offered I went forward and joined
the church. For some reason it became easier after
I had had an opportunity to go fishing with
Reverend Day. In high school I joined the Future
Farmers of America and continued my interest in
agriculture, but never left the 4-H club. There
was some school of thought that a person should
devote all of his time to one or the other, and in
many areas this was emphasized and encouraged,
but I was never encouraged to leave the 4-H club and
devote all of my time to Future Farmers of America.
In hindsight, I think this was a good thing because
each one of them offered different opportunities
during my high school days. The Future Farmers of
America offered more opportunity for leadership
training, which I found very helpful for the rest
of my life, particularly during the years I served
in the legislature. Upon entering high school, I
participated in a calf scramble as a member of the
Future Farmers of America and went on the next year
to win Grand Champion. I did not get much in the way
of remuneration for my award, but it was a lot of
fun. In fact, I recall the calf brought 36 cents a
pound which was not much money now and was
certainly not much money even then for a Grand
Champion keg. As a 4-H'er in 1949, I entered the
dairy judging contest in Houston, as I mentioned
earlier, and won a dairy heifer fair as a result of
winning being number one in the judging contest.
This was quite an accomplishment at the time
because there were several hundred 4-H'ers that
were entered in the judging contest. Later on, our
team won state judging in, in dairy judging in
1949, and we had an opportunity to go to the
national contest in Memphis, Tennessee. And this
was probably my first trip outside of the state of
Texas. And it was very enjoyable. We traveled with
the state winning FFA team that was out of
Burleson, Texas. And I still see occasionally one
of those judging team members who is a member of the
faculty in the University of Mississippi. That
same year, I entered Texas A&M as a freshman
student and, of course, entered the Corps of
Cadets. The freshmen at that time were stationed
at what is now known as the Riverside Campus of
Texas A&M University on Highway 21 just west of
Bryan. It was an old Air Force base that had been
abandoned and turned over to Texas A&M. We lived in
barracks, about 20 to each barrack, and it was not
the best of conditions for studying and getting
rest. But we had a lot of fun, and I managed to make my
grades, although many of the fellows that I was in
the same barracks with flunked out after one
semester, or at least the second semester. At the
end of that freshman year, it was necessary to
select the branch of service that we wanted to
continue our military experience with. I
selected the US Air Force and continued my
training, ROTC training, in the Air Force ROTC.
At the end of the first semester, I had decided to
move home because of the fact that I had a rather
large project of egg production. This was putting
me through school but was certainly a burden to my
mother who was having to take care of them while I
was living out at the O'Brien Air Force Base. or
they called it then the annex, I felt like I could be
of some service by being at home and traveling back
and forth and at least marketing the eggs and from
time to time helping with tending to my laying
hens.
It is amazing now to look back how profitable the
egg production operation was. by today's
standards, very small, but at that time was rather
large. In fact, there was only one or two
operations in the county that were larger than
mine. I look back at the records that I kept at that
time were at the peak of the laying season. I was
netting as much as a dollar per chicken per month
this would be unbelievable by today's standards
in 1950 we all moved to the main campus since only
freshmen were at the annex and that same year the
annex was closed we were the last class to be at the
annex and incidentally the annex was placed there
because of the hazing problems that existed on the
campus. And the thought was that if they could
separate the freshmen out for four years, that
there would be little or no hazing at Texas A&M in
the Corps of Cadets. Frankly, it didn't work that
way. There still was hazing. But it probably
helped to change the attitudes of some of the
cadets through the separation that we
experienced.
I decided early on to major in dairy science since I
had been involved with my dairy project, and my
father by then had entered the dairy business with
his brother, Charlie Preston. The dairy was
located close to or on the land that I now own. Now,
one of the people that had a great influence on my
life was the vocational agriculture teacher and
the sponsor of Future Farmers of America in Brown
for many years, Mr. J.C. Dooley. I got much of my
leadership training through the Future Farmer
program. I served as secretary and president of
the local chapter. Had a long time experience with
Mr. Dooley when I later joined the Young Farmers
Association as a charter member and as its charter
president here in Bryan.
It was no surprise to anyone, I'm sure, that I
selected the field of agriculture and I decided on
a degree plan at Texas A&M. However, as a senior in
Bryan High School, I really became interested in
two other fields. First, I enjoyed designing
house plans, and so architecture was a strong
consideration for a long time. I also considered
the School of Veterinary Medicine. But in both
cases, the programs were more than four years, and
as a result, Maybe just due to laziness, I decided I
wanted a four-year program and chose not to select
either one of those programs.
I would be remiss not to mention some of my boyhood
acquaintances during the time that I was growing
up at Tabor, where I had lived all of my life.
mentioned earlier, we lived close to the school
where there was a home called the teacherage that
was provided the school principal. He had two sons
who were close to my age. One was in my grade, and we
played together. The one my age is now a minister of
education. at the First Baptist Church in
Harlingen, Texas, and we have maintained
some communication over the years. Another
neighbor just down the road on the other side of my
home
was a boy named Elvin Barnes, and we were together
almost constantly. Elvin's father was a
blacksmith and I guess that may have contributed
to my interest in tinkering. We were always up to
something. I recall one time we took a starter
motor off of an old truck that my father owned and
mounted it on a wagon and were going to run the
starter motor with a battery. So it would
essentially have been a battery-powered car.
This possibly is where my first tinkering with
things started, and I have been accused by a former
chancellor of the Texas University System of
enjoying tinkering with legislation,
or as he referred to it, being the fiddler in the
band. I'm sure there are many other traits that I
picked up in those early boyhood, high school,
college days that contributed to my adulthood.
They're sometimes very difficult to identify all
of them. But I'm sure that my opportunity to
conduct meetings and provide some leadership
helped when I entered the legislature and was
given leadership responsibilities there. I know
that it made a difference in my confidence level to
conduct meetings and to arrive at consensus views
with my colleagues in the legislature and to get
things done that had to be done. All of these
Experiences and training helped overcome the shy
person that I was, but I'm not sure that I totally
overcame my shyness except for the short period of
time that I had to run for office in 1968. and I
probably reverted back to some of it even after
that event took place. One of the opportunities
that I was provided during my boyhood days was a
chance to read quite a bit in the summer months. At
that time, the county provided a bookmobile that
went around the to the rural counties, rural
communities, and provided a library, moving
library. And so one day each week, the bookmobile
would park in front of our store, which was next
door to our home. And I had the opportunity to check
out a book. turn in the ones that I had previously
checked out, and read the book before the
bookmobile returned the next week. If it had not
been for the bookmobile, I probably would have not
read as much as I did during those summer months.
I'm sure all of that reading was helpful to me in my
schoolwork and giving me more ability to read.
Another educational opportunity that was
afforded was through the phonics program that was
just being developed when I was a second grader.
And one of the originators of the phonics program
came to our school from College Station and taught
phonics to us. I will always believe that had a
great deal to do with my ability to sound out almost
any word and to spell virtually any word.
Sometimes it doesn't quite work out
phonetically, but most of the time it does. And I am
a strong believer that phonics contributed a
great deal to my educational progress.
Throughout those boyhood days, it seemed that
opportunities were always presenting
themselves just at the right time. And I'll always
be grateful and feel quite fortunate that things
worked out as they did. It was good to live in a rural
community to have a rural background and to
experience those things that only someone raised
in a rural area can experience. At the same time, I
got a good education through the Bryan system,
which was known as one of the best in the state at the
time. And so many things that happened that people
that came my way that I will always be grateful
This is chapter two, which will deal with my
ancestry.
I do not wish to reiterate a lot of work that has been
done on the genealogy of the two branches of the
family of my mother and father, but I would like to
give some information that may not show up on any of
the genealogy work that has been done. Both my
mother and father were from pioneer families that
helped settle Brazos County, and I think that some
of this is worth mentioning because it gave them
very strong ties to this area and relationship
with many people both through family, kinship,
and friends that influenced my life a great deal.
On my mother's side of the family, her grandmother
was of a Kurd family that settled in the Kurd
community on a grant that had been provided by
Stephen F. Austin. They probably would have
stayed there for generations to come, but started
feuding with the Millicans on the southern end of
the county, and as a result, one of the Kurd boys
shot one of the Millican boys, and their land at
Curtin had to be sold to defend the Kurd boy and keep
him out of prison. It seems very strange and ironic
and I don't know the explanation for it, but years
later the two families made up and the Kurd family
moved to Milliken and were sponsored by the
Milliken family. This moved my grandmother
closer to where My grandfather was being raised by
the Clay family in Clay Station, just on the other
side of the Brazos River. Little is known about my
grandfather on my mother's side, except that he
was raised by the Clay family and was given to the
family, provided to the family, maybe is a better
word, in St. Louis, Missouri. The Clay family was
very good to him, and this is indicated by the fact
that he stayed with the family until he was 24. He
could have left under the arrangement that they
had at the age of 21.
Some of the more pleasant experiences that my
mother remembered was having been raised as a
child where the Texas World Speedway is now
established.
My mother had two brothers and four sisters. The
two brothers were Lewis Marquette, was a
carpenter in Houston, and lost a hand in an
accidental gun discharge while he was home on
leave during World War I. Uncle Lewis had two boys
that still live in Houston. The other brother was
Seth, known as Bud Marquardt.
Uncle Bud was a carpenter that lived in the either
Bryan College Station or Navistota during his
lifetime.
Uncle Bud is the only one that's still alive at the
time I am recording this. The oldest sister was
Lena Allen, whose husband was Eddie Allen, a
landowner of some renown in the Peach Creek
community. Uncle Eddie was known to buy land that
joined him and that he accumulated a great deal of
property over the years. Aunt Lena and Uncle Ebby
had ten children and Uncle Ebby's ambition was to
leave each one of them a thousand acres and a
hundred head of cattle and he accomplished this by
accumulating ten thousand acres of land and a
thousand head of cattle in the Beech Creek
community just south of College Station. Some of
those children still live in the Beach Creek and
College Station community. Others have since
moved away. Another large family was mother's
sister, Liddy Arnold, who was married to Henry
Arnold. Uncle Henry worked for Texas A&M, his
adult life in the power plant, the home that they
lived in that I recall other than the time they
lived in Wilburn is where the Central Park and
College Station is located. The pavilion has a
plaque recognizing the family's residence there
in the park where the pavilion is. Two of Mother's
sisters moved to the Baytown area
When they married, or shortly after they married,
Addie Baker married Uncle Raleigh Baker, and they
had six children. They stayed in Milliken for a
while, but he moved to Baytown. The family moved to
Baytown when one of the older boys was six years of
age, and he worked for Humble Oil and Refining
Company for the rest of his life. My family was
probably closer to the Baker family than any of the
others. We paired off quite well in age and the fact
that there was one about the same age in each family
and of the same sex.
The Baker that was my age was Charles Baker, who was
now an orthopedic surgeon in Houston, Texas.
The oldest son of the Baker family was R.W. Baker,
who was quite instrumental in the fact that he was
involved in political endeavors much of his life
and got me interested in an indirect way in
politics. In addition to that, he came to Bryan one
day and wanted to start a local bank. And we decided
on a location in College Station. It became known
as Commerce National Bank and is now known as
Compass Bank. And this has been quite an
experience in developing the bank. We ended up
buying out the Baker family several years after
the bank was started. R.W.' 's interest in
politics was right after the war, came back and ran
for state representative in Houston. He was
defeated in that first race, but came back to be
elected later and served in the House for several
sessions before he, several terms before he was
elected as the lone state senator for Harris
County. After serving only about one term in the
state senate, he decided to run for lieutenant
governor. He entered a race and would have won the
race probably had there been a decent turnout that
day in Houston, Texas. The turnout was very low
and, as a result, was defeated by a very, very small
margin by the person who later became governor,
Preston Smith. R.W. would probably have been the
first Aggie governor had it not been for that slim
margin of defeat back in about 1972. I'm sorry, 62,
62.
My involvement in that race I will discuss later.
Mother's youngest sister I knew as Aunt Bitt. Her
last name was Taylor. She was married to Hoyt
Taylor, and they lived in Pelley, Texas, which is
now a part of Baytown. She had two boys and one girl,
Hoyt Jr., Jimmy, and June Marie. The two boys
had lived their lives in Bryan College Station in
June Marie. He is married and lives in Austin,
Texas. Turning to my father's side of the family, a
little bit more is known because of his
grandfather's keeping of records that we still
have to this day.
Those old ledgers that we have in our possession
date back to the early 1850s and run through 1882.
His
name was R. H. Hudspeth, and he, along with his
brother T. H. Hudspeth, ran a general store in
Wheelock, Texas in about...
the early 1860s, he closed the store in Wheelock
and joined the Confederate Army as a captain in the
Hoods Brigade. And when he returned, he never
opened the store, but moved in with his daughter,
Mary, who was my grandmother.
My father spent much time with his grandfather,
R.H. Hudspeth, and he tells me that he was
reluctant to talk about the Civil War. He was a
scout and apparently had many experiences that he
would just rather forget.
I found this in one of the old ledgers He wrote in
1869,
after his service in the Hood Brigade, he wrote,
quote, many men of many minds, many men of many
kinds, and a good many of no minds at all. I'm not
sure what this tells us about the man, but he
apparently... able to overcome those
experiences after a while and go on with his life.
He purchased a rather large tract of land from a
Colonel Giddings, or through Colonel Giddings,
probably Giddings, Texas is named for, and
began farming and ranching, primarily ranching
in the Terrier area. I have 100 acres of that land
today. At the time, he purchased about 2,000 acres
from all indications of the records that I have. As
I say, he kept extensive records, records such
things as school attendance of the kids, bad
weather days, the sickness of his employees.
Interestingly enough, they seemed like the kids
started to school at a very odd time of the year. But
he kept a record of all these kinds of happenings.
He raised a lot of sheep, hogs, and cattle. He had a
lot of records of him paying sheep herders. They
made $15 a month working full time as sheep
herders. In 1871, he paid $15.37 in ad valorem
taxes. This was for the 1,537 acres that he owned in
the area where my farm is today. He had five horses,
50 cows, 520 sheep, 25 hogs, one wagon, one bucky,
and one bull.
At the same time, the balance of it, there was some
land that came up the total of 2,000 acres in the
name of Mrs. M. M. Hudspeth. I'm not sure who M. M.
Hudspeth is. She had 400 acres. And then Mrs. Mary
Hudspeth had 212 acres. Mary Hudspeth was my
grandmother. M. M. Hudspeth was probably another
daughter that
we know as the Hudspeth Prairie.